## Team 3: Covid-19 Case Study
This is the presentation and code that goes along with a case study done during the Fields Institute Forecasting for Decision-Making shortcourse in summer 2023. Team members include Danielle Berger, Gabriel Dansereau, Rhiannon Loster & Keara Smith. The purpose of this Covid-19 case study was to work on editting a base model with the given data, while hopefully answering the given "decision maker's request". The base model in this case was given as an SEIR (Susceptible, Exposed, Infected, Recovered) compartmental model, and the data was Covid-19 cases from the end of January to the end of March 2020 in British Columbia, CA. The decision maker's request was whether or not to implement masks within British Columbia, by making projections for the next 30 days (April 2020). The data used and code modified (using both R and STAN files) for this case study are available, as well as a pdf file of the presentation given on July 28, 2023.

## Getting Started
The attached code uses both DOCKER, if DOCKER is not already installed follow the instructions seen within the README file found here; https://github.com/kbbodner/cefi_shortcourse_students_2023/blob/main/CaseStudy_Covid19/covidseir/README.md

Once this is running open the "introduction_stan_seir_case_study.Qmd" to begin running the model.

## Summary
The COVID-19 pandemic has been perceived as one of the greatest global threats, not only to public health and well-being, but also to global economic and social stability. In British Columbia, jurisdictions have implemented varying measures, namely lockdowns, shift from in-person to virtual care, and quarantines, to mitigate potential consequences. Since the coronavirus can spread through droplets and particles released into the air by speaking, coughing, or sneezing, masks are very helpful in preventing the virus from spreading in crowded indoor public spaces. There are various types of masks and respirators that are used to prevent the spread of disease. Forecasting models are useful in helping understand what kind of effect certain interventions, such as using masks, will have on the number of cases and spread of a disease, such as COVID-19. The objective of this model was to to justify or oppose mask usage by projecting the daily case rate for wearing (or not wearing) various mask types. This model forecasted case rates to the end of April with data from the beginning of January to the end of March, 2020. With a mask policy, our model found N95 masks to have the greatest impact on decreasing the impact of COVID-19 infection with a decrease in daily case numbers across all Health Authorities. Notably, N95 masks reduced daily case numbers by about 99% in the Fraser Health Authority by April 30th. By evaluating the impact of every member of the public wearing a face mask, it was found that masks reduce the spread of COVID-19 and thus, may be an effective way to control case rates across the province. 


